## Economy

These aren't technical comments, they are observations about the Bitcoin
economy.

### Bootstrapping

 - Stage 1: Bitcoins worth effectively nothing.  Easy to generate, but
   no one will accept them.  Used as a hobby for the developers.
 - Stage 2: Bitcoins gain small implicit value.  Cost to generate is
   still small, but value is small.  Very few will accept.  Their very
   small value makes any increase significant though, and some start
   hoarding large quantities in the hopes of future payout.
 - Stage 3: Merchant trading begins.  Bitcoins are used as a means of
   transferring more established currencies.  Their very attractive
   movement characteristics (being able to move money anywhere in the
   world, near instantly) gives them their appeal.  Most traders will
   want them merely to turn back into their local currency.  However,
   that does mean that their value is real and fixed.  It is only
   because that value is real that a currency conversion is possible.
 - Stage 4: Big guns arrive.  Large investors notice Bitcoins.  Like
   merchants, they don't want Bitcoins themselves, they want them to
   increase in value over time and be turned back into more established
   currencies.  This will probably happen a few times, with the price
   being highly volatile.  If that volatility doesn't lead to collapse,
   then their will be a series of price jumps and stability will be
   achieved at some particular value.
 - Stage 5: Merchants still don't want Bitcoins for themselves, they
   want them for the facilities they enable.  Merchants will for all
   intents, instantly convert between local currency and Bitcoins.
   Probably with automatic software that takes a fixed (say) dollar
   price and converts to Bitcoins for the checkout, and then converts
   the received Bitcoins straight back to dollars.  The trader _has_ to
   do this, all of their running costs will be in the established
   currency, they cannot purchase in dollars and sell in bitcoins and
   not convert instantly back to dollars.
 - Stage 6: Prices in Bitcoins.  Rather than pricing in the established
   currency and converting, merchants will price in Bitcoins and convert.
   This stage will therefore be the longest and hardest to achieve; it
   needs traders to be able to both buy and sell in Bitcoins, and for
   that to happen it needs to be possible right to the bottom of their
   supply chain.  It's unlikely that large companies will change in any
   reasonable time frame.  The electricity company, gas company,
   telephone company, etc have no incentive at all to change.  On the
   other hand, they are large enough to be able to accept multiple
   currencies as payment.
 - Stage 7: Banking in Bitcoins.  The first bank to offer a bank account
   denominated in Bitcoins will be the beginning of the end.  Given that
   many of the traditional banking services are not needed with
   Bitcoins, Bitcoin bank accounts will be for depositors to invest in
   lenders.  Bitcoins are sufficiently flexible that it's possible we
   would see the first community bank.
 - Stage 8: Wages in Bitcoins.  Bitcoins become so useful and so widely
   accepted that employers start paying in Bitcoins.  Pensions.
 - Stage 9: Stock markets measured in Bitcoins.
 - Stage 10: Governments accept taxes in Bitcoins.  Ha.  That'll be the
   day.

I think we're at stage 4 now; few merchants, big(ger) investors are
starting to notice the potential for profit should Bitcoin take off.  I
suspect stage 5 will be easy to get to, electronic trading is inevitable
and Bitcoins are an appealing way of doing it.  Stage 6 could
potentially take decades to reach.  It requires a fundamental
restructuring of the economies of the world.  It's possible that a
developing country might seize on Bitcoins and get there much faster
because they have nothing to restructure at present.


### Deflation

A lot is made of the fact that Bitcoins, once they hit their 21 million
limit, will be naturally deflationary.  That is to say that their
purchasing ability will go up.

Deflation is a problem (supposedly) because it will be cheaper to buy
something tomorrow than it is to buy today, so you will always defer
your purchase.  However, that ignores the fact that you don't have use
of whatever it is you would purchase as well.  If you were a builder
wanting a new hammer, well you want that hammer because it will enable
you to do work that you could not do without it.  The hammer is worth
more to you than the money you use to purchase it (as is the case with
all free trade everywhere).  When currency is deflating, it simply
balances the equation in a different place.  Before you purchase your
hammer you would have to be sure that you can earn more with the hammer
than you would have gained by holding onto your currency.

Even if you find it advantageous to horde currency, what will you be
doing with that horde?  It gives you nothing while it is sat under your
mattress.  So we must assume that you are hording it in the hopes of one
day having more value, and spending it.  Oops -- but if you are spending
it you can't be hording it can you?

The only result really is that people will keep more savings of a
deflationary currency than they do of an inflationary currency; which is
no bad thing anyway.  Further, once they find that they are sitting on a
big pile of currency, it might occur to them that they can make even
more from it by investing it.  Investments will not have to be as
profitable since they do not have to keep up with inflation, instead
they must lose no more than deflation replaces.  Therefore investment
will be more likely when using a deflationary currency.

Finally; a stack of money in a cupboard and never used is no different
from the rest of the world's perspective than money that never existed.
Since the number on the paper is irrelevant, only what can be purchased
with that number, the rest of the economy will eventually rebalance to
take account of the horded money, which, on average will be a function
of population.  No disaster there.

Better minds than mine, in the form of the Nobel winning Austrian school
economists thought that currency was better for more people when it was
commodity backed.  Primarily because the supply was fixed.  Bitcoins
share that property and remove the need to keep some arbitrarily chosen
rare mineral in a vault.  It's also far easier to get one millionth of a
Bitcoin than it is to get one millionth of a gram of gold.

