## Privacy

Surprisingly for a currency that lists privacy and anonymity as
features, they are very easy to lose when using Bitcoins.

With a centralised currency, you have no more privacy than you do with
Bitcoin, it is simply that the number of people that can spy on you is
vastly reduced.  Paypal, Google, your bank, Tesco, pretty much any
centralised authority involved in your finances will be recording all
the information they can about you forever.  They will happily sell that
information to anyone who asks, and will hand it over to any government
that waves their government stick at them.  There is no way around this.

With Bitcoin, on the other hand, it is _possible_ to remain anonymous,
but it will not happen on its own, you must take precautions, just as
you do with existing currencies.

The problem is that every Bitcoin transaction from address to address is
recorded in the blockchain for all to see.  The difference of course is
that there is no way, looking only at the blockchain, to see who owns
what address.

However, the blockchain does not stand alone in the world.  Once you
Bitcoins are actually used for something, both the buyer and seller
reveal information to each other.

### Merchants

Let's say you are a merchant.  You obviously don't want your competitors
knowing what sales you make.  But, if you use a single incoming Bitcoin
address for all payments, that's exactly what happens -- your
competitors will have no difficulty finding that one address and then
have no difficulty examining the block chain to see all receipts to that
address.  There is nothing to stop a merchant organising their business
in that way and discarding their privacy.  Bitcoin is not _inherently_
private.  Should the merchant value his privacy, what he _should_ do is
generate a new address for each customer (at least), or each transaction
(at most).  Probably most will settle for a per-customer address --
there is a nice one-to-one relationship between customer accounts and
bitcoin addresses; meaning that a customer could credit their account
and then spend it, rather than needing to make a purchase first.

For example:

    FROM     : aiZ8uuk2ol5gi2Aiisa2Oodo  (customer address)
    TO       : Ael2tailna8couNeang3Ooch  (per-customer merchant address)
    VALUE    : 10.00

Provided TO address is uniquely generated for each customer, and never
publicly published, no competitor can ever know anything about sales.

### Customers

Now, let's imagine that you, the merchant, are a mail order company.
You probably know, at least, your customer's address, but probably their
name as well.  You are then able to associate any transmitting address
with that customer's details.  In the above example then:

    FROM     : aiZ8uuk2ol5gi2Aiisa2Oodo  (customer address)
    TO       : Ael2tailna8couNeang3Ooch  (per-customer merchant address)
    VALUE    : 10.00

The merchant knows that `Ael2tailna8couNeang3Ooch` represents, say _Joe
Bloggs_.  Therefore `aiZ8uuk2ol5gi2Aiisa2Oodo` represents _Joe Bloggs_
as well.  A quick trip to the block chain might then reveal

    FROM     : uesh5Ei9og4Ohch3Ohnah3ie  (Joe Bloggs fund source)
    TO       : aiZ8uuk2ol5gi2Aiisa2Oodo  (Joe Bloggs)
    VALUE    : 10.00
    TO       : uesh5Ei9og4Ohch3Ohnah3ie  (change)
    VALUE    : 2990.00

We might be able to guess that _Joe Bloggs_ is paid 3000 a month.  If
he buys more than once from us, it's perfectly possible that we could 
repeat this trick and be more confident in that guess.

Ouch.  This is not the sort of thing people like to reveal.

It's worth noting at this point that this same trick can be pulled the
other way.  When the merchant gives the customer an address, that
address can be linked to the merchant.


### Laundering

Laundering in the cash world is usually associated with criminal
activity.  In the bitcoin world it's going to be fundamental to retain
your anonymity.

The way it will work is by the existence of trusted anonymising
services.  These will essentially be one-in-one-out; probably with a
little bit of lag to allow the pool to churn a little.  I'll call this
service a "bank", because the level of trust needed is similar.  We give
the "bank" some coins.  Sent, as is sensible, to a per-customer address,
rather than a per-bank address (it might even be sensible for the bank
to maintain a pool of incoming addresses and reuse these too -- there
would be slightly more complexity for the customer though).  Many people
do this; and the bank records these as deposits to each sender's
personal account, and now holds an enormous pool of coins.

When a depositor wishes to spend Bitcoins, rather than use the bitcoin
client, they tell their bank via some secure means (just as we do now
with cash) -- say a website with username and password -- what address
we wish to send to.  The bank selects one or more of the incoming
addresses to create the required outgoing amount and creates the bitcoin
transaction.

Note: the bank uses _any_ per-customer incoming addresses as outgoing
addresses.  All of those incoming addresses represent one giant pool.
They are only per-customer on the incoming side; so that the correct
bank account can be credited.  Outgoing, there is no way of linking the
outgoing address to the spender because their is no link.

Trust is needed because you are essentially giving control of your money
over to the bank -- you are only able to spend them provided the banker is
willing to spend them on your behalf.  Standard banking regulation will
probably sort that problem out though.

Of course we're now back to square one.  The "bank" is now a centralised
authority that knows our transactions.  There is this difference though:
there is no need for this sort of bank to ever know anything about us.
Our account is the equivalent of an anonymous numbered swiss bank
account.  Nor does the bank even need to hold our coins for any significant
length of time; we could simply pay in and instantly pay out again to a
newly generated address.  The coins would be back in our wallet, but
those we get back are different from those we sent out, and the block
chain can no longer reveal anything about us.

### Unnecessary

Now... given that the above is perfectly possible, and that it's likely
that people will offer services like the above, following the block
chain becomes pointless.  Let's return to our merchant spying on his
customer:

    FROM     : aiZ8uuk2ol5gi2Aiisa2Oodo  (customer address)
    TO       : Ael2tailna8couNeang3Ooch  (per-customer merchant address)
    VALUE    : 10.00

The merchant knows that `Ael2tailna8couNeang3Ooch` represents, say _Joe
Bloggs_.  We concluded, that therefore `aiZ8uuk2ol5gi2Aiisa2Oodo`
represents _Joe Bloggs_ as well.  That is no longer a valid conclusion.

The merchant has _no way_ of knowing whether _Joe Bloggs_ sent coins
from his own bitcoin installation or had a bank service do it on his
behalf.  There is nothing to show that `aiZ8uuk2ol5gi2Aiisa2Oodo` is
either from a "bank" or not from a "bank", nor whether it is from _Joe
Bloggs_ himself or one of his friends.

The mere existence of the ability to use a mixing service means that it
is pointless to try to track anyone using the block chain.  Provided the
service is available, and commonly used, it won't matter whether you use
a bank or not for any given transaction... the spy has no way of knowing
how you paid.

### Governments

Governments have a lot more power than merchants.  Unfortunately.  The
risk then is that they come knocking on the banker's door and demand
that the logs of expenditure be handed over to them.  This allows them
to reconnect bitcoin addresses across the anonymising black box that is
the bank.

This reveals less than it does with a normal bank, as there is no
information associated with an account other than an "incoming" address.
The chain is reformed though, and the government agent can then carry on
following the links via the Bitcoin blockchain.

The solution here then is this: multiple banks in multiple governmental
jurisdictions.

Once there are mixing services all over the world, it will become
possible to send coins from mixer A to mixer B to mixer C, each in
different countries.  Government agents lose an awful lot of their power
once international borders are crossed.  They will find it very
difficult to obtain the private records of all these mixers.

### Payroll

Let's say our merchant were Amazon.  Amazon would receive vast amounts
of Bitcoins and would pay vast amounts of employees and suppliers out of
the money they receive.  In essence, acting as an implicit mixing service.
There would be no way of tracing coins through a large merchant, as
there is no way to know what the merchant is buying or who they are
employing (looking only at the block chain -- obviously the merchant
themselves know).

### Summary

In essence: anonymity is not guaranteed by Bitcoin, but it is supported.
As the Bitcoin economy takes off, it will become so close to pointless
to track chains of transactions that no one will bother.  Therefore as a
law-abiding every day citizen you need not worry, simply make use of
what mixing services you wish as they become available.

As a merchant you need do only one thing: use more than one incoming
address.  Probably you will create one per customer, but one per
transaction is perfectly feasible.

Should you want to use Bitcoin for criminal activity (and let's remember
that what is "criminal" is an accident of the time and place of your
birth), you'll have to jump through some much bigger hoops; but then you
had to do that anyway didn't you, if you're a criminal?

