## Repostes

### Bitcoins are overvalued

Compared to what, exactly?

The value of anything is determined at the time one person is willing to
sell to another at a particular price.  Bitcoins are worth what they are
trading for.  That's it.

At any given instant the price tells us nothing.  Speculators might
desire that the price go up from the time when they bought, but it is
the relative change that matters to them, not the absolute value at
either time.  It's easy to see why: does it matter that it costs 81 Yen
to buy a dollar?  Of course not, for everything priced in Yen is
approximately 81 times the price in dollars.

If Bitcoins had started life priced at $1,000 per coin and were now
worth $1,000,000; that would be indistinguishable from them starting out
at $0.01 and now being worth $10.  For this reason picking any arbitrary
price and saying that is "too big" is meaningless.


### Bitcoins are not backed by anything

No.  Nor is any fiat currency; and if we're being brutal, nor is gold.

Gold has value only because everybody has assigned it that value, and
trusts that everybody else does too.

Bitcoins only have the value that their owners attribute to them.

There is nothing in this world that is 'backed' by something else of
intrinsic value -- in fact there is nothing that is itself of intrinsic
value.  All value is assumed and ascribed.  Bitcoins are no worse or
better than anything else that is traded.  Even if you believe that gold
has implicit value, by virtue of the fact that historically it has
implicit value, you should be aware that fiat currencies are _not_
backed by gold; and haven't been since the world moved away from the
gold standard.  Your paper is worthless.  You can't then complain that
Bitcoins are worthless, since by that logic, so are all the notes in
your pocket.

Bitcoins however have a particular advantage over fiat currency in that
they are not debt notes.  A dollar is nothing more than a fancy IOU.  A
Bitcoin, on the other hand, represents value that has been poured into
it.  What value is a different question.

Let us imagine that there are ten Bitcoins in the world, and I own all
of them.  You think that they will make pretty numbers on your hard disk
and offer me a dollar for the lot, and I accept.  Those Bitcoins are
worth one dollar, at that moment, at that time, for that instant, no one
can argue -- those Bitcoins are worth a dollar, for that is what you and
I both valued them at (possibly I valued them a little less, and you
valued them a little more, but that's quibbling).  Now that that sale
has occurred a dollar has been pushed into the currency that is
Bitcoins, they must collectively be worth at least that.  Ten cents
each.  Someone else comes along, seeing that Bitcoins are worth at least
ten cents, and that I made a dollar profit on mine, and offers you eleven
cents for one.  The whole pool is now worth $1.01.  Another real one
cent has been pushed into the collective store.  This process continues,
with the price adjusting until supply equals demand and the value of a
Bitcoin is known.

So, what are Bitcoins backed by?  They are backed by the money people
have used to purchase them, and subsequently the products suppliers are
willing to exchange for them.  _Just like everything else in the world_.

If that still isn't sufficient for you, there is one final point:
Bitcoins take time and electricity to calculate.  That electricity costs
money.  While there is no hard link (there is nothing to stop a buyer
valuing them less than the miner paid to generate them) Bitcoins do not
spring from thin air for free.  That, in theory, gives a floor to their
value -- that value being the work needed to solve a difficult
mathematical problem.


### Fiat currencies are backed by government promise

No.  They really aren't.  Unless that promise is "we promise to pay the
bearer of a $10 note, two $5 notes".  The promise would have to be of
the form "$1 is worth X amount of Y product".

If fiat currency were pegged to something real then foreign currency
exchanges would have no purpose since the value of all currencies would
be fixed to the value of this "promise".

If there were such a promise it has been regularly broken over and over
again since the leaving of the gold standard as they printed more and
more notes devaluing those that you hold again and again.


### Fiat currencies are backed by the estate of the Queen/King

... if you happen to live in a monarachy.

This was actually said to me, by an intelligent guy (admittedly he was a
bit drunk).  It's incredible how wrong this myth really is.  Your
currency notes, at one time in the past, gave you a claim on the gold
held by the central bank (not the monarch).  Your fiat currency does not
give you a claim on anything, and it most certainly doesn't give you a
claim on the assets of your monarch, who's property is as privately held
as your own.


### Bitcoins are a Bubble

A financial bubble happens when a traded item is selling for more than
it is inherently worth.  It increases in value, and that increase means
that it is always (ahem, temporarily) sensible to buy... which increases
demand, which increases the price, which makes it even more sensible to
buy.  It's called the greater fool theory: that even though you have
bought (knowingly) something for more than it is worth, there will
always be a greater fool than you to buy it off you for more than you
paid.

Eventually of course, time is called, everybody knows that the item is
overpriced, and so everyone is just waiting for the collapse so they can
jump ship.  That means any small perturbation can trigger collapse.

Here is the important part of bubble economics that gets missed: the
traded item devalues when the bubble bursts, but it _does not devalue to
zero_.  When it is trading high, it is _overvalued_ not worthless.  As
its price falls and falls as the bubble bursts, it will reach the point
were it will be actually be _undervalued_.  For example, the world has
experienced a housing bubble.  Properties in the centre of New York were
overvalued.  The bubble has now burst; would you pay ten dollars for a
New York apartment?  One hundred?  One thousand?  Ten thousand?  If you
are sane, you will answer yes.  A New York apartment would still be
worth $10,000, and you would be a fool not to buy if you were offered one
at that price.

If Bitcoins are a financial bubble, and it pops, they will not devalue
to zero, and for the purposes of Bitcoin's long term survival, that is
all that matters.

All currency is a bubble.  They are guaranteed to trade at more the
physical items are worth.  So far, more traditional currencies have not
popped.  Bitcoin may or may not.  So what?

A certain amount of stability is important for a currency to get day to
day use; but a currency that is in day to day use will gain that
stability naturally.  Until then, Bitcoin can be used to transport value
regardless of their current price.  If I want to send you $20, I can
simply send you $20 worth of Bitcoins at today's prices.  If you want to
turn that back into dollars, that is your call; if you want to speculate
that tomorrow they will be worth more, go right to it.  This means it is
perfectly possible for a vendor to accept Bitcoins, although it will
perhaps be some time before we see goods priced in Bitcoins rather than
some national currency.

The point is that Bitcoins still have a purpose and a use (and hence
value) regardless of their price.  Should their value completely
collapse, they will still be able to function as a store of value.


### Bitcoins are a Ponzi scheme

A Ponzi scheme is a con.  Investors' money is not actually invested in a
Ponzi scheme, it is simply held and used to pay the profits of the
previous investors.  The investors are _not told that though_.  Ponzi
schemes rely on each generation of new investors being larger than the
previous generation so that there is enough money flowing in to pay the
fake profits.

Let's not confuse a Ponzi scheme with a normal profitable investment;
let's say a successful company stock.  Let's say that you, as an early
investor, make a profit (just as in a Ponzi scheme); that is the
privilege of being an early investor: you saw value where others did
not.  You took the risk when others would not.  It could just as easily
have gone wrong for you, and you would have lost your investment.  Your
reward, from a certain perspective, comes when later investors drive the
price up because they later see the potential that you saw early.  Did
you then take their money in a Ponzi scheme cheat because the later
investors effectively gave value to the early investors?  No.  You all
knew what you were buying, and made your choice.  What's more,
everybody's money is still backed by something: the investment itself --
a percentage of ownership of a company.  The difference is that the late
adopters can still make money by virtue of their ownership of something
of value.

The point is that in a Ponzi scheme, nothing is actually purchased that
could be called an investment, the money is simply held by the
perpetrator.  There will always be some central authority running the
scheme (and taking a percentage); and more importantly: the operator
lies to the investors, and the eventual collapse of the scheme is
guaranteed.

Bitcoins are not a Ponzi scheme.  There is no central operator.  There
is no lie, everybody knows what it is.  There is no guarantee of profit
or loss.  Either investors believe that Bitcoins have value or they
don't.  That is their choice.  It is in fact that choice that determines
the Bitcoin exchange rates.  Bitcoins might increase in value, they
might decrease -- just like any other investment, and people make their
own judgement.


### Bitcoins are a Pyramid Scheme

A pyramid scheme shares some properties with a Ponzi scheme, but is not
a Ponzi.  Each investor is responsible for recruiting new investors.
Those that they do recruit are arranged "under" them in a pyramid.  A
percentage of the new investor's money is paid to the investor "above"
them, and so on and so on up the tree.  People high up in the tree are
early investors and are paid by future investors.  There is often a
product somewhere in a pyramid scheme, and the product price is used as
the method of taking money -- the top of the tree pays a cheaper price
for the product than the lower levels.

A pyramid scheme has investors arranged in a pyramid.  Bitcoin doesn't,
so it isn't.


### Bitcoin will fail because it will succeed

This is one of the more bizarre of the attacks that get levelled against
Bitcoin.  The argument goes like this: Bitcoins will eventually be worth
$10,000 each, so the early adopters will unfairly make huge gains at the
expense of the late adopters.  Therefore Bitcoin will never take off.

The illogicality is obvious when we observe that if "Bitcoin never
takes off" then they won't be worth $10,000 each.

This argument is essentially based in envy.  Early adopters paid a few
cents per Bitcoin.  At time of writing they are trading at $8 each.
Therefore those early adopters (assuming they didn't cash out before
now) have made an incredible profit.  The thing is: so what?  High risk
has always equated to high reward, and the risk of investing in Bitcoin
then (and perhaps even now) is that you will lose 100% of your
investment.  No one knows if Bitcoin will take off, or if it will
suddenly collapse into ignominy.  Investors are therefore taking a risk.
It is only fair that they are rewarded for that risk, in the event of
success.  Those early adopters are the ones who first primed the Bitcoin
pump; without them it would not now be worth talking about in this
context.  There is a reward for seeing future potential when others do
not.  Someone who invested $1,500 in Google in 1999 would now be a
millionaire.

Hindsight is 20/20; and it's easy to think that the early adopters have
unfairly profited.  They did not.  Their profit was entirely fair: they
believed and risked when you did not.  Live with it.


### Bitcoins are deflationary

Let's be clear: inflation and deflation are technically words that
describe changes in the money supply.  The Bitcoin network is programmed
to asymptotically generate 21 million coins over a number of years,
approaching but never reaching that 21 million.  That is to say the
money supply will increase at first, and there is therefore inflation.

Once the number generated becomes negligibly small there will effectively
be no more made.  Therefore the money supply will be stable, and hence
neither inflating or deflating (ignoring the small deflation that will
come about from the odd lost coin).

However, most people don't think of inflation as money supply inflation,
most people understand inflation and deflation to mean _price_ inflation
and deflation; this is understandable as they only have experience of
inflationary currencies (not a single fiat currency has ever been
anything but inflationary), and one side effect of an inflating currency
is prices increase as the value per unit of currency decreases.  In a
Bitcoin world, in a static economy, prices would remain stable, money
supply would remain stable and so there would be no deflation.

Of course there is no such thing as a static economy.  Rather, we assume
because the population is increasing, and because each year we have fed
another year's worth of labour and production into our economy, that it
will increase in value.  Given that the number of Bitcoins will be
fixed, that increased value of the economy must be divided amongst the
same number of coins, and so the value of individual Bitcoins will go
up.  It is this _price deflation_ that makes people call Bitcoins
deflationary.

One of the more bizarre arguments made goes something like "Bitcoins are
deflationary, which is why we see behaviour X at present".  Completely
ignoring the fact that though Bitcoins will _eventually_ be slightly
deflationary, they are inflationary at the moment.  Making an argument
based on Bitcoins being deflationary is, at present, utterly wrong.  We
won't see the true effects of using a deflationary currency until and
unless Bitcoins become a sizeable proportion of an economy.  Since there
has never been a deflationary currency in wide use, there is no way to
sensibly predict what will happen.


### Deflation is bad

Deflation is supposed to be bad for two reasons:

 - Given the choice between spending today, or spending tomorrow, you
   will get more for your money tomorrow.  The same will be true
   tomorrow, so no one will ever spend, and will simply hoard Bitcoins.
 - Debts measured in currency units are bigger tomorrow than they are
   today.

Let's deal with hoarding first.

 - Hoarding can't continue indefinitely, an individual needs to live,
   and to live they need to spend.  Don't believe me?  Tell me, would
   you prefer to pay $10 for a bunch of roses on the day of your wedding
   anniversary, or $9 the day after?  Would you prefer to pay $10 for a
   bottle of water now, or $1 in a month (assuming you can't get water
   elsewhere)?
 - If coins are hoarded then they aren't being spent.  For what purpose
   are they being hoarded?  Presumably for profit, but unless you spend
   them Bitcoins will fall in value and there is no profit.  Therefore
   an equilibrium will be reached, where people "cash out" and take the
   profit they have seen accumulate in their savings by spending them.

These two points mean that the entire supply of coins will not be
hoarded all at once.  There will be some percentage of coins that are
hoarded, and the rest will be in circulation.  Let's say the number of
coins that are in circulation is X out of a total population of Y coins,
with X being proportional to Y, whatever value of Y is chosen.

Now let's temporarily imagine a different currency.  For some reason
(which I won't specify), people don't like hoarding this alternative
currency.  Let's say that this currency has Z coins in circulation.

If we make X equal to Z then what is the difference in these two
situations?  There is none.  Given that Bitcoin's total coins was an
entirely arbitrary amount, with the expectation that they will be
subdivided or combined to whatever level is necessary for the economy,
the exact choice of Y doesn't matter.  If Y doesn't matter, then X
doesn't matter.  If X doesn't matter then Z doesn't matter.

In short: hoarding is irrelevant -- an equilibrium will be reached were
an amount of coins represent the flowing economy.  What that amount is
doesn't matter in the slightest, only that it exists.

Now let's deal with debts being bigger tomorrow.  In our inflationary
world, investment is discouraged by the currency.  A factory owner
spends money on new machinery for his business.  This is a long-term
investment.  The problem is that his expenditure is measured in
today-dollars, but his return is measured in tomorrow-dollars, which
will be worth less.  Every investment must out-perform inflation to make
it worthwhile for the investor.  If you want 5% profit, your investment
must make 10% (say) when measured in an inflating currency.

Further, if you borrow money to invest, then that debt is smaller
tomorrow than it is today, which encourages debt.  Are we surprised then
that the entire world is in debt?

Conversely, in a deflationary world your investment can make a slight
numerical loss, and still be a profit (in value) for you.  A business
making 5% numerically is actually making 10% in value when the profit is
measured in a 5% deflationary currency.  The compensatory cost for this
is of course that the loan you took out to invest at 10% costs you an
additional 5% because it is worth more tomorrow than it is today.

You should be able to see that the two cases are identical: inflation
and deflation are irrelevant.  All prices move up and down together as
inflation and deflation happen.  That is as it should be, it means that
value remains the same, and isn't measured in arbitrarily assigned units
of currency.

Think of an example: a loaf of bread cost, say $0.02 in 1920; and $2.00
in 2010.  Is that loaf worth more or less?  You see the trick, normally
the question here is "is the dollar worth more or less?".  The answer is
that a loaf is still worth one loaf.  More relevant is: what percentage
of your income would a loaf cost in 1920 and what would it cost in 2010.
This answer is completely independent of what currency you happen to be
using (the answer to this question is that it costs a smaller percentage
of your income, because the entire world is richer now than it was in
1920).

One final point: Bitcoin is _never_ going to replace all world
currencies, if any.  If you like your inflationary currency, inflated at
the whim of a central authority for their benefit not yours, fine, use
that.  The fundamental principles of Bitcoin are ones of voluntaryism --
no one is coerced to run a node, and anyone can (in principle) pick
whatever limits and constants they like for their client -- of course no
one else is forced to go along with you, and hence the majority wins.

For the socialists of the world: inflation hurts poor people more than
it hurts rich people (and conversely deflation hurts rich people more
than it hurts poor people).  Rich people are more likely to have savings
in the form of non-currency denominated assets.  Those assets retain
their value when governments inflate the currency supply.  Poorer people
have savings denominated in currency units, and so they suffer more from
those currency units being devalued.  With no savings, it is simply the
prices in the economy that affect wealth; so the absolute poorest suffer
the most when prices go up.  Socialists should be more in favour of
Bitcoins than anyone else.


### People won't accept a decreasing pay packet

One reason that inflationary currencies are accepted is that it allows
people to have ever-increasing wages.  Of course they aren't really
getting any more money, because the inflation means that everything that
they would buy with their wage is more expensive.  Many people don't
receive a greater-than-inflation pay increase; and the poorest receive
lower-than-inflation pay increases.  Again: inflation is worse for poor
people.

This isn't an economic problem, it is a psychological one.  The solution
in Bitcoin world will likely be that people will keep their inflationary
currency for setting their wage and will instantly convert to Bitcoins.
Their company might even do it for them if Bitcoins are popular enough.
Your wage would be denominated in dollars but paid in Bitcoins.

People can then happily have their ever-increasing pay packet.  It won't
matter though, as they will have the easy option of converting it to
inflation proof Bitcoins.  Maybe with time the psychology will change
and people will understand that that ever increasing pay packet continues
to buy them exactly the same number of Bitcoins.  Either way: it won't
matter.


### Mining is Unsustainable

To understand this myth you need to know that the Bitcoin network
maintains a constant rate of block creation by raising and lowering a
network wide difficulty parameter.  Therefore as more miners appear, the
mathematical problem that needs solving is made harder.

The complaint goes that as the difficulty goes up the miners have to
dedicate more and more electricity to generate the same number of coins,
so they are "worth" more.  This is nonsense.  There is no connection
between the price of creation of a currency "note" and the value it
represents.  $100 dollar bills do not cost 100 times more to print than
a $1 bill; and $1 bills do not even cost $1 to print.

If it costs a miner more to generate their coins than the coins are
worth, then they will cease mining.  That will lower the difficulty, and
mining will get easier.  Therefore difficulty will follow price.  Price
will not follow difficulty.

It's easy to see why: the buyers of Bitcoins are not forced to pay what
the miners ask for their coins.  If it cost $50 for a miner to make a
coin, they can offer it for sale at $51, at their option.  A buyer of
Bitcoins who thinks that they are not worth that cannot be forced to pay that
though.  If coins are currently worth $10, then there are potentially a
lot of sellers other than the miner who might be interested in selling
somewhere between $10 and $51.  Hence the miner is not able to drive
price up simply because they spent more electricity generating.


### Bitcoin can be completely bought out

Bitcoin is such a small market (relatively) that one large investor
could currently buy the whole market, effectively killing Bitcoin if
they wished.

Here's why this wouldn't be a problem:

 - Not all Bitcoins are necessarily for sale.  However, let's assume
   they all are _at a price_.  This rich investor would drive the price
   of Bitcoins up and up.  The existing owners of Bitcoins would be
   delighted.  This would be a huge windfall for them.  There would be a
   huge amount of publicity for Bitcoin.  The investor would then be the
   sole owner, and the Bitcoins he owned would be worth zero -- his
   money would be gone, not invested.
 - Remember that the marginal cost to begin a Bitcoin chain is close to
   zero.  The Bitcoin chain exists as the official one only by
   voluntary, mutual agreement.  This agreement is expressed by people
   choosing the client that they run, and the developers could easily
   start a new chain and publicise it.  Once all the coins in the
   current chain had been bought out, then Bitcoin would have been
   demonstrated to be a huge success.  It would be hugely popular.  A
   new chain would then be started and the whole game begins from
   exactly where it left off; only this time the large investor will
   have transferred a large chunk of wealth to the previous owners.

In short: if a rich lunatic were foolish enough to try to stop Bitcoin
by virtue of buying the market, it would be great for Bitcoin, and bad
for the rich lunatic.

Since Bitcoin's scarcity is mathemematically and algorithmically
enforced rather than being due to physical scarcity, more can always be
made.  Their value comes from their use a method of trade and value
transfer.  Take that away by collecting them all under one owner and
that value vanishes.  Bitcoins only have value while many people are
using and owning them.  Buying them all removes that value.


### Bitcoin should be 'pegged' to a real currency for stability

Pegging a currency is not something that you just decide to do, it is
done by acting.  It requires vast amounts of the pegged-to currency (and
pegged currency, but since pegging is usually done by states who can
print their own currency, that part is much easier) to manipulate the
market keeping your own currency at the target price.  The amount of
foreign currency needed is also dependent on how hard the market is
trying to move your currency.

For example, with enormous wealth I could offer to sell Bitcoins for
$1.01 and buy Bitcoins at $0.99; well then the price would stay fixed at
$1.00; but I would have to pump massive amounts of money into the system
to make it work, because as soon as I ran out of Bitcoins to sell,
someone else would offer them at a higher or lower price, as they chose.

In other words: Bitcoin will never be pegged to anything, as pegging
requires the resources of a state to do it, and even then is
monumentally expensive.  Worse: there is no particularly good reason to
do this; market manipulation simply hides price signals that should
rightly be transmitted to participants.


### Bitcoin is unworkable, why look at how much they cost

Erm... they are increasing in value, and that is somehow evidence that
the Bitcoin model is broken?  Okay.


### Bitcoins will eventually be declared illegal

Maybe.  It will take an incredible amount of chutzpah on the part of a
government to do so though.  For a government to ban Bitcoins will mean
banning of a freely traded security.  It would also be a terribly
difficult law to write... have a think about it, what exactly would you
ban?  Miners?  Exchanges?  Computers?  Cryptography?  The Internet?

Banning it will not be enough though; just as bit torrents have survived
legal attacks.  Banning it will probably be done in the name of stopping
tax evasion, money laundering and drug dealing.  This regardless of the
fact that these things are themselves illegal already, adding "running
illegal software" to the charge sheet probably won't bother those
criminals too much.

So; a ban, if it happened, would simply stop legitimate businesses from
accepting Bitcoins -- or rather it would prevent them from declaring
taxable income in the form of Bitcoins.  It would not stop individuals
using Bitcoins to move value as they wish.

The Bitcoin genie is out of the bottle; just as the knowledge needed to
make nuclear weapons couldn't be un-discovered, Bitcoin cannot be
uninvented.


### Fractional reserve banking is impossible with bitcoins

Fractional reserve banking is the primary means of money creation (or
rather credit creation) in financially developed countries.  Imagine
that there is only one bank in the world.  Alice deposits $100 in the
bank.  The bank lends that $100 to Bob, who uses it to buy a painting
from Charlie.  Charlie deposits that $100 in the bank.  The bank lends
that $100 to Dave... and so on.  The same $100 is owned by both Alice
and Charlie, and loaned to Bob and Dave.  When there are
multiple banks, the principle still holds in aggregate: the money ends
up in one of them eventually, and can then be lent out again.

This is a 0% fractional reserve banking system.  In reality, national
laws prevent banks from doing this, and set the FRB ratio at between 3%
and 5%.  In other words, the bank lends out 95% of what it has on
deposit.

You might have heard of "bank runs".  This is when too many depositors
turn up at the bank to withdraw their money.  The bank has lent out 95%
of what they had on deposit.  This would be a disaster for them except
for one thing: central banks.  The central bank of a country is referred
to as the "lender of last resort"; and being a central bank, they have
access to the printing presses.  Should a bank run ever occur, the idea
is that the central bank can simply print (and lend) as much money as is
necessary to the bank.  This is meant to make bank runs unlikely,
because depositors know that their money will always be available.

Fractional reserve banking with bitcoins is therefore perfectly
possible.  Nothing prevents a bank from lending out 95% of all deposits.
The assumption is that whomever ends up with the money that was lent
eventually deposits it back in the bank.

The difference is that there is no central bank of bitcoins.  There is
no printing press, and therefore no "lender of last resort".  In the
event of a bank run on a bitcoin bank, the bank would go bust, and
people would loose money.

There are arguments either way for this being a good or bad thing; but
they are irrelevant with respect to this section.  Fractional reserve
banking is possible with bitcoins; but it is a lot more dangerous.


